* Why GCP : The most important reason to migrate to GCP is for its state of the art infrastructure of network. It has the largest network spread in the 
	    world and is increasing day by day.
	    Other important aspects are :
	    Pricing - The pricing model is cheaper than other cloud providers. Google bills in minute as well as second level increaments and if the 
		      services are used for a long period, it gives good amount of discounts as well. NOTE : There are a few scenarios where other clouds
		      charges lesser than GCP for few of the services but in most cases the charges by GCP are less as compared to other providers.
	    Customization - GCP allows wide range of customizations for any instance. In other providers, you won't get flexibility for customizations
			    to that level.
	    Scalability - Extreme level of Scaling is provided by GCP where as level of scaling is slightly less as compared to GCP.
	    Live Migration - GCP is the only cloud provider which supports live migration of VMs.
	    Big Data - GCP has an edge over other providers as it provides many in-built and pre-trained ML and AI services.

* Cloud Computing : It is the on-demand availability of computer and system resources, especially data storage and compute power without direct active
		  management by the user.


* Cloud Journey :
Buying -> Renting -> On-Demand


* Cloud Computing Models :
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) - The most basic category of cloud computing services. With IaaS, you rent IT infrastructure - servers and virtual
				     machines (VMs), storage, networks, operating systems - from a cloud provider on a pay as you go basis.
				     Ex - Leased Car
PaaS (Platform as a Service) - Cloud computing services that supply an on-demand environment for developing, testing, delivering and managing software
			       applications.
			       Ex - Uber or Ola
SaaS (Software as a Service) - This is an end application which is delivered over the internet, on demand and typically on a subscription basis.
			       Ex - Bus
Serverless - With serverless, the cloud service provider automatically provisions, scales and manages the infrastructure required to run the code. You don't
	     need to setup an environment as well. If the code is supported, it is going to run on demand.


* Cloud Market Leaders :
Mainly there are 3 market leaders in the cloud business.
1. AWS - Amazon Web Services, owned by Amazon. It has a head start of 5 years which means it is more mature and has largest market share in terms of cloud.
	 It has per hour based pricing.
2. Azure - Owned by Microsoft. It has great integration capabilities and since most of the organizations use Microsoft tools, Azure becomes very much easy
	   for integration. It has per minute based pricing.
3. GCP - Google Cloud Platform, owned by Google. This is the only cloud which has a growth rate of 100%. It has per 10 minute based pricing.


* Core services provided by cloud market leaders :
Services		AWS							Azure					GCP
IaaS			Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)			Virtual Machines			Google Compute Engine
PaaS			AWS Elastic Beanstalk					App Service and Cloud Services		Google App Engine
Containers		Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud Container Service		Azure Kubernetes Services		Google Kubernetes Engine
Serverless Functions	AWS Lambda						Azure Functions				Google Cloud Functions


* Accesing Google Cloud Console :
Link to access google cloud console - console.cloud.google.com


* Projects in Google Cloud :
Google Cloud Project is the main object under which all the required google services run and are billed as per the usage.
You can view all projects, create a new project, move or shut down an existing project (requires permission)


* Google Services :
To see all the core google services, click on the hamburger menu present in the left most part of the google console and there you will see a list of all 
different types of services offered by Google.


* IAM & Admin :
Identity & Access Management allows you to control who can access or use what resources. This is for security of the project.


* APIs & Services :


* Cloud Shell :


* Compute Services :
Compute Engine - An IaaS service that provides configurable virtual machines (VMs) hosted on Google's infrastructure. Here you pay only for the compute
		 seconds you use.
App Engine - Fully managed PaaS service. It is a way to run code without worrying about the infrastructure. Mostly used for building web applications. 
	     This also uses per second increment billing model.
Kubernetes Engine - It is a Container as a Service (CaaS). Helps to run containerized applications in the cloud environment. It is fully managed auto 
		    scale, auto upgrade & auto repair cluster manager and used for Cluster management and orchestration system for coordinating containers.
Cloud Functions - It is a Function as a Service (FaaS). An event based, compute solution that allows you to create services that respond to the cloud events
		  without requiring an explicitly managed server or a runtime environment. Billed only for the function's execution time meter to the 
		  nearest 100 mili-seconds.
Cloud Run - Develop and deploy highly scalable containerized applications on a fully managed serverless platform
VMware Engine - Run your VMware workloads natively on Google Cloud


* Storage Services :
Cloud Storage - An unified object storage service, offering a spectrum of storage options including geo-redundant, regional, nearline (for data accessed 
	  	less than once in a month) and coldline (for data accessed less than once in a year)
		Parameters on which the cloud storage is charged :
		i> The amount of data stored.
		ii> The duration for which the data is stored.
		iii> The number of operations you performed on the stored data.
		iv> Network resources used when moving or accesing the data stored.
Filestore - Fully managed network attached storage system for Compute Engine and GKE instances
Data Transfer - This is used to transfer data to and from the cloud online. It has three service - Online Transfer, Transfer Service & Transfer Appliance
NOTE : Persistent Disks are Block storages for VMs while Local SSDs are VM locally attached SSDs


* Database Services :
Cloud Bigtable - It is fully managed, Petabyte scale, low-latency, non-relational DB (NoSQL) bigdata DB service. Used for append only data (analytical data)
Cloud Datastore - A NoSQL schema-less database for storing non-relational data. It is an alternative to Bigtable when ACID transactions are required. It
		  has structured data but can be accessed with a NoSQL key-value pair mechanism
Cloud Firestore - Serverless NoSQL document DB
Cloud Memorystore - Managed Redis and Memcached DB (in memory datastore)
Cloud Spanner - Horizontally scalable relational DB. Specially designed to combine the power of relational DB along with horizontal scale capacity of a 
		non-relational DB. This helps delivering high-performance transactions with 99.999% availablity. Used when your datasets are huge (In TBs)
Cloud SQL - Fully Managed Relational Database service for hosting MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQL Server DBs. Ensures that databases are reliable, secure and
	    scalable so that you can use your time to focus on development rather than administration. It automates backups, replication, provisioning etc
	    by ensuring greater than 99.95% availability. Used when your datasets are small (In GBs)


* Big Data Services :
BigQuery - Petabyte scale, Data Warehouse and Analytics solution
BigQuery BI Engine - In-memory analytics engine
BigQuery ML - BigQuery model training/serving
Cloud Composer - Managed workflow orchestration service built on apache airflow (author, schedule and monitor jobs)
Cloud Data Fusion - Graphically manage data pipelines (used to manage ETL and ELT data pipelines)
Cloud Dataflow - Stream/Batch data processing
Cloud Dataprep - Visual data wrangling (data cleaning and preparing structured and unstructured data)
Cloud Dataproc - Managed Spark and Hadoop
Cloud Pub/Sub - Global real-time messaging to send and receive between applications
Cloud Datalab - Data exploration, analysis and visualization
Data Catalog - Metadata management service
Data Studio - Collaborative data exploration/dashboarding
Looker - Enterprise BI and Analytics


* Networking Services :
Carrier Peering - Peer through a career
Direct Peering - Peer with GCP
Dedicated Interconnect - Dedicated private network connection (dedicated fiber network from your data center to GCP)
Partner Interconnect - Connect on-prem network to VPC
Cloud Armor - DDoS protection and WAF
Cloud CDN - Content delivery network
Cloud DNS - Programmable DNS serving
Cloud Load Balancing - Multi-region load distribution/balancing
Cloud NAT - Network address translation service
Cloud Router - VPC/on-prem network route exchange 
Cloud VPN - Virtual private network connection (High Availability)
Network Service Tiers - Price VS Performance Tiering
Network Telemetry - Network telemetry service
Traffic Director - Service mesh traffic management
Google Cloud Service Mesh - Service-aware network management
Virtual Private Cloud - Software defined networking
VPC Service Controls - Security perimeters for API based services
Network Intelligence Center - Network monitoring and topology


* AI Services :
There are a lot of AI/ML services for different different purposes


NOTE : 
Creating Buckets - The name of the bucket should be globally unique across GCP


* Bigdata processing related products :
Input Data		Ingestion Layer			Processing Layer		Storage Layer			Visualization
----------		--------------			---------------			-------------			-------------
Compute Storage		Cloud Pub/Sub			Cloud Dataflow			Compute Storage			Google Sheets
Cloud SQL		Compute Data Transfer		Cloud Dataproc			BigQuery			Cloud Data Studio
Cloud Spanner		Cloud IOT Core			Cloud Dataprep			Cloud Bigtable			Cloud Datalab
Cloud Datastore		Cloud Firestore											Looker
Cloud Bigtable