It is a Business Intelligence software and Big Data Analytics platform that helps you explore analyse and share real time business analytics easily.
It helps you see the data which company collects and helps you create visualizations and dashboards.

It is a browser based cloud application.


The Left pannel has a few sections and are visible based on how looker admin has configured for the role that have been assigned to the user :
1. Explore - Data Explorers ask questions to the data and create visualizations and reports that can be shared with others such as Data Viewers.
2. Data Viewer - Here all the contents created are stored.

NOTE : 
Content in looker terminology refers to Looks and Dasboards.
Looks are stand-alone reports or visualizations while Dashboard has more than one Visualization.

3. Develop - This is used by LookML Developers to query the explores that are accessible to data explorers via the Explore tab.
	     Within the Develop environment, Developers can specify which fields are available in each Explore, how each field appears and the logic or
	     behaviour for each field.
	     Developers can move into the development mode using the button present in the bottom left corner.
4. Admin - Looker Administrators use the Admin menu to configure the users, permissions and other settings for the looker instance such as DB connections.

NOTE : You maynot see a develop or Admin menu if that's not part of your role.

5. Boards - They serve as a useful way of organizing content such as saving multiple looks and dashboards onto one board that you can share with others.


Looker provides Drill-Down option to further get into the details of the data.
If you want to drill down further, you get an option to explore. On clicking that, it comes out of the dashboard and enters a separate interface called
Explore. This is a separate part of looker and from here you can explore different parts of the data without disrupting the underlying dashboard.

Explore is a report builder interface as well as a portal to ask questions of your data.

Each visualization (Look) in a Dashboard is referred to as a Tile.


** The 4 core analytics concepts :
1. Dimensions - These are qualities or attributes of the data.
2. Measures - These are aggregates (primarily numbers) which are calculated based on different attributes.
3. Filters - These helps to reduce or narrow down the results returned.
4. Pivots - In order to show the data in a matrix format so that it becomes easy to read and interpret the data, pivots are used.


Dimensions : 
Essentially, all the columns of a table are dimension.
Each column represents the attribute of the table.

Measures :
There are data aggregates based on different attributes of the data.
These are basically calculations like Count, Sum, Max, Min, Avg.

Filters :
These helps to reduce or narrow down the results returned.
They don't delete anything from the source rather they are only applied to the data that are displayed in the looker screen.
There can be both Dimension filter as well as Measure filter.
Filters excludes the records either at the begining or at the end based on the type of filter used :
	Dimension Filter - In case of Dimension filter, the records are excluded at the begining because these conditions are row specific.
	Measures Filter - In case of Measures filter, the records are excluded at the end because these conditions are based on aggregated data.

Pivot :
When you have a data like this :

Fruit_Colour	IsRound		Count
yellow		no		5
orange		yes		2
red		yes		2
green		no		2
green		yes		1

So, you have repeating values present because of the other dimension, then if you Pivot on the dimension field, each unique value of the field becomes
the header for the resultant dataset and it becomes easier to read and interpret. The data becomes something like this :

Fruit_Colour	no	yes
yellow		5	.
orange		.	2
red		.	2
green		2	1


** Table Calculations :
These are a way to create on the fly metrics with formulas.
This also gives an option to create new fields, without waiting for a LookML Developer.
These are created when you want to look into the data for which there is no field set in that way and it is one time or very rare.
If it is frequent enough, then LookML Developers should look and create the data models accordingly.
It is created on top of the aggregated data that is generated by selecting different Dimensions and Measures.
Example - Percentage of Flights cancelled. --> This will come by first selecting Measures - Count of Cancelled Flights and Total number of Flights

Types of table calculations :
1. String
2. Mathematical
3. Logical
4. Date & Time


** Offset Functions :
These functions are subset of table calculation functions.
They allow you to programatically reference values from other rows or columns in your query results to calculate new values.

Types of Offset functions :
1. offset()
2. pivot_offset()
3. offset_list()

offset() - 
This is used when we want to select a higher or lower value from the result set.
syntax : offset([column_name], [reference])
example : offset(${orders.total_revenue}, 1) --> gets the next row value
	  offset(${orders.total_revenue}, -1) --> gets the previous row value

pivot_offset() - 
This is used to reference values from the column to the left or to the right when you have a pivot table.
syntax : pivot_offset([column_name], [reference])
example : pivot_offset(${orders.total_revenue}, 1) --> gets the next column value
	  pivot_offset(${orders.total_revenue}, -1) --> gets the previous column value

offset_list() -
This function moves up or down a column of rows defined by a first provided value and then grabs another number of rows worth of data defined by a second
provided value. The two numbers can be same or different depending on the results that you want.
syntax : offset_list([column_name], [range(start, end)])
example : offset_list(${orders.count}, -3, 3) --> starts from above 3 position and takes values till next 3 position
	  (helps to get a comma separated full string of values - Usually used for calculating rolling averages)


** Looks :
Looks are stand-alone report which gets created from the results of a query from an Explorer using the Visualization tab.
Once created, it can be saved, favourited, shared or even scheduled for regular delivery.
You can also drill down inside the data present in any Look by clicking on "Explore from Here" option.
This taked you back to the underlying explore where you could modify the Look as desired.

Creating a look :
If you know how to work with dimensions, measures, pivots, filters, offset and table calculations of the Explore, you can easily create a look.

Delivery options for Looks :
Download - This extract the data to your own computer. Looks supports downloading in the following file formats - csv, zip file (containing multiple csv's),
	   pdf or png.
Send - This allows your data to move somewhere else. The most popular destination is email.
       NOTE : Depending on how admin configures the account for the user, user may get other options such as AmazonS3, GCS as well.
Schedule - If you need to send the look on a regular basis, then this option can be used. Here you need to set the frequency as well.
Share - This is like sharing a link. Once you click you get a link that you can share with the users with which you want to share the Look.


** Dashboards :
Dashboards are combinations of multiple Looks created to showcase a common story.
These Looks in Dashboards are called as Tiles and they can be added from the Visualizations tab by querying data from Explore.

Editing a Dashboard :
Open the Dashboard and click on the top right '3 dot button'. There you the option to edit the Dashboard.
Once you are in edit mode you can drag the tiles and position them by selecting them in the top left side of the tile and also it can be resized by selecting
them in the bottom right corner of the tile.

In Edit mode, you get three options :
1. Add Tiles - Using this more tiles (visualizations) can be added. NOTE : Additionally you can add a Text Tile as well.
2. Filters - This helps to add Filters to the dashboard.
3. Settings - This is where all settings of how the dashboard runs and refreshes are configured.

Once you are done with the changes, you can hit the save button to save changes to the Dashboard.


NOTE : A default value can be set as Default filter in looker Dashboard.

Faceted Filter - When a filter field depends on another filter field to show the values accordingly, then this kind of filter is used.
Example - Filter of State and its respective Cities.


** Data Delivery options for dashboards :
There are two scenarios in this :
1. Send the data once - Here you can Download the Dashboard and send it across
2. Send the data more than once - Here you schedule the Dashboard so that it gets delivered on any frequency