* Business Intelligence - It is an end to end process starting from extracting the data from different sources to transforming & loading the data into a 
				specific format in order to build reports and dashboards which helps the clients to get insights of the business and take 
				informed decisions.
				Need --> Collect --> Analyze --> Visualize --> Decision



* Importance of BI - 
1. Improves decision making
2. Optimizing internal business process
3. Increases operational efficiencies
4. Better ROI (Return on investment)
5. Helps gain competitive edge



* Roles in Data :
1. Business Analyst - One who knows the business itself and is expert in interpreting the data that comes from the visualization.
2. Data Analyst - One who is responsible for profiling, cleaning and transforming the data which is basically the ETL process and designing & building 
			the scalable performant data models and enabling & implementing the advanced analytics capabilities into the report.
3. Data Engineer - They are the technical persons who are responsible for creating data pipelines which helps the different types of data (both structured
			 and unstructured) to flow from different sources and combines to form a dataset of a particular format.
4. Data Scientist - These are the guys who performs advanced analytics which are used to predict future values.
5. Database Administrator - They are responsible for the overall availability and consistent performance and optimizations of the database solutions.



* Power BI VS Tableau - 
1. Calculation - Power BI has indepth calculation techniques which is DAX (Data Analysis Expressions)
2. ETL Tool - Power BI has it's own ETL tool which is Power Query.
3. Visuals - Advances visualizations are present and it keeps on growing.
4. Cost - Cost is low as compared to other BI tools. Power BI Desktop (PBI Desktop) is free.



* Power BI VS Excel -
1. Power BI can store and analyse huge amount of data smoothly as compared to excel as it starts to hand as soon as the data becomes larger.
2. A lot of advanced functions and formulas are present in Power BI which makes it way powerful than excel for finding data insights and trends.
3. The interface is much smoother and user friendly as compared to excel.
4. Sharing is much easier as the report gets refreshed real time whereas in excel, once the report is shared, you do not get any further refreshes until
   the excel is shared again. It becomes a repetative way of sharing data and not easy to maintain the updates when working in a team.
5. More secure than excel as the full data is shared when sharing in excel but in Power BI, RLS (Row Level Security) can be granted so that specific users
   can see the records that are relevant to them.



* Power BI - It is a Business Intelligence tool which helps the End Users to get meaningful insigts of the data.

There are 3 Ways to use Power BI :
1> PowerBI Desktop - For Report Developers (80% of work - Offline)
2> PowerBI Service - For Report Developer & Consumer of the report (Cloud based application where you push the reports to share with others - Online)
3> PowerBI Mobile - For Report Consumer (Once the report is published, the consumer can start seeing the reports directly from their mobile - Online)



* Architecture - 
There are two major components of Power BI :
1. PBI Service (Cloud Based Program)
2. PBI Desktop (Offline Program) 

Approach 1> Data Sources (connect) ---------------------------------> Power BI Service (access) --> Consumers
Approach 2> Data Sources (connect) --> Power BI Desktop (publish) --> Power BI Service (access) --> Consumers

Approach 1 can be used to directly connect the source data to the PBI Service so that the data becomes immediately available to the consumers but there is
one important limitations and that is it doesnot support the DAX functions and thus in-depth calculation and analysis is not possible and that's why 
approach 2 is majorly used for creating reports and dashboards.

Power BI gateways - These are there to automate the schedule refreshes of the source data so that the report is refreshed.



* Components of Power BI :
1. PBI Desktop - This is where the reports are developed.
2. PBI Service - This is where the reports are published so that the end users can access them to get insights.
3. PBI Mobile Apps - This is where consumers can see the reports in real time through their mobile phones as well.
4. PBI Report Server - Many clients doenot want to publish the report in the public cloud and that's when this service is used. This is used to publish the
			     report in the client's on-premise server or cloud.



* PBI Flow - 
Extract -> Transform -> Load -> Data Modeling -> DAX -> Report Building (Visualization) -> Publish Report -> Dashboard Creation -> Share & Collaborate
|------ Power Query -------|    |-- Power Pivot ---|    |-------- Power View --------|
|------------------------------- Power BI Desktop ------------------------------------|    |------------------ Power BI Service ---------------------|



* Core Views of PBI Desktop -
1. Report View - This is where the report is created by dragging and drawing the visualizations needed with respect to the data.
2. Data View - This is where you can see the data that is loaded from external sources.
3. Model View - Here we build the model, create relationship etc.



* Setting options for the current file -
There are two types of settings : "GLOBAL" & "CURRENT FILE"
Steps : File --> Options & Settings --> Options
Power BI is smart enough to establish the relationship between different tables. It creates the relationships automatically but for some scenarios you need
to create by your own. Now, if you want to create relationships from scratch by your own, then you need to uncheck the option "Autodetect new relationships
after data is loaded".



* Components of PBI Desktop :
1. Power Query - Used for ETL, Cleaning of the data before loading or after loading as well
2. Power Pivot - Used for Modelling and Building relationships between different tables
3. Power View - Used for creating visualizations and Dashboards
4. Power BI Service - Used to publish and share the report with teams or different Users



* Data Connectors :
Home --> Get Data
There are many connectors available in Power BI which are used to connect to different types of sources :
ODataFeed - If you have an URL as part of the data source, then you can use the connector - ODataFeed (open datafeed)
Connect to a Folder - This is used when you have similar files that are to be loaded in PBI Desktop as one single query. Also it becomes very much useful 
			    when similar kinds of files are to be loaded in some frequency (say monthly). This helps avoiding manual intervention. 
NOTE - If you connect a file and load it into PBI, then PBI makes the connection with the name of the file. Now, if the name is changed later, then PBI 
	 will fail to load/update the file later as it will try to find the file with the name that was there while it was connected for the first time.
	 With Folders, this problem will not occur as you have made connection to PBI with the folder name and thus even if the naming convention changes, 
	 the file will be read as long as it resides insides the folder. When you load from a folder and if the folder has multiple files, it asks how to 
	 load the data - If you combine and load, an extra column gets created with the name "Source.Name" which contains the name of the files as per the
	 corresponding rows.



* Power Query -
This is the in-built tool which is used to do ETL. 
All the data cleanup, identifying/correcting data types, transformation are done using this tool.
This can be used by clicking on the "Transform Data" option present in "Home".
Once you click it, Power Query Editor window opens up.

One important feature about Power Query is that every action that you take on the loaded dataset is recorded as "applied steps". So, next time when the 
data is refreshed, it applies all the recorded steps to the refreshed load data.
There are 2 important tabs in Power Query Editor :
i> Transform - This helps to transform the field values and replaces the old value with the transformed value.
ii> Add Column - This also helps to transform the field values but instead of replacing, it keeps the transformed values into a New Column.

NOTE - Most of the options are similar in "Transform" & "Add Column" tab of the Power Query Editor Window.
	 Every file that you load is called a Query and in Power Query under Query Settings, you have the property option under which you can change the 
	 query name as well. It is recommended to provide small names as while using functions, the query names are used if there is a need to access any
	 column/field from the same query.



* Difference between TRANSFORM and LOAD -
Once the data is loaded by a connector, it gives three options : 
i> Load - This loads the data directly into Power BI.
ii> Transform Data - This opens the data in Power Query Editor window so that the data can be cleaned and transformed if needed (Highly Recommended).
iii> Close - This closes the window without loading the data.

NOTE : Power BI is smart enough to detect the data types properly but still if you see that data type is not detected properly, then you can change the 
	 type manually by clicking on the left side of the field name whose type you want to change. Data Type detected are shown in the left side of the
	 field name in Power Query Editor window.



* Tables in DW -
There are 2 types of tables in DataWarehousing environment :
i> Dimension Table - These are generally master tables which has unique list of records and they store the details about the facts.
ii> Fact Table - These are generally the transactional tables and they mostly have the numbers on which all the analysis are done.



* Merge, Add and Remove columns :
In order to add columns, you need to move to the "Add Column" tab of the Power Query Editor and then select option based on how you want the column to be
created. To Merge columns, you need to select all the columns in sequence that you want to merge by pressing CTRL key and then select the "merge" option.
Now, Adding a merged column is also possible - only thing is instead of selecting "merge" in the "Transform" tab of the Power Query Editor, you need to 
select "merge" option from the "Add Column" tab of the Power Query Editor. In order to remove columns, just select the columns that you want to remove by
pressing CTRL key (when selecting multiple columns) and then right click & select "Remove Columns".

NOTE - All transformations that you do will have a step recorded under "applied steps" with a generic name. You can rename the steps so that you can
	 understand the changes that you did in that step when looking at a very later point of time.



* Sorting in Power Query :
Sorting is quite easy in Power Query. If you want to sort the data based on any field, then select the field that you want to sort and then select the
"sort" option present under Home tab. Once you do that, you will see that the data is sorted and there will be an arrow sign signifying the same. Now, 
multi-level sorting is also possible and if you want to do that, then you need to select the next column on the basis of which you want to sort and then 
select "sort" option. The 2nd field will also get an arrow signifying that the field is also sorted and in addition to that, since there are two columns
on which the data is sorted, it marks levels with numbers like 1 & 2 in order to signify that the data is sorted on which columns based on level.

NOTE - A step will get added as soon as you sort the data but if you want to revert the change and remove the sorting, then you just need to remove the 
	 sorting step.



* Merge and Append Queries :
Append - Append means adding records which is same as union operation. Now, in order to append queries, you need to have atleast more than one query 
	   loaded into Power Query and the number of columns & type of the column should match with each other. If everything matches, then click on 
	   "Append Queries" option present under Home tab. Now, Append queries has two types - 
	   i> Append Queries - This appends the other query/queries under the selected query.
	   ii> Append Queries as New - This appends all the queries selected and creates a new query. You just need to select the queries that you want to 
		 append and then place it to the right hand side. Now the sequence of appending can also be customised using the up and down key.
Merge - Merge means adding field or columns which is same as join operation. Now, in order to merge, you need to have the query or table that has the 
	  column that you want to bring in the existing query or table using the common field. If the table is present, then you need to select "Merge
	  Queries" option present under Home tab. Now similar to what we have for Append, Merge can also be done in two ways which is merging in the same
	  query or table and the other option is to merge one or more columns in the existing query but as a new query without changing the existing one.
	  Once you click on Merge, a dialog box opens and you will see that the one in which you want to merge is already selected and it is asking you to
	  select the other query/table that you want to merge and then you need to select the common column from both the queries/tables on the basis of 
	  which you want to merge. Now, click - "OK". Once you click "OK", you will see that the full merged table link comes at the end with arrows pointing
	  to two different sides. Click on that and it will give an option to select the column/columns that you want to merge from the merged table. There
	  is a check box which asks if you want to use the original column name as prefix which means if you check that, it will add the query name along 
	  with the column name (query_name.column_name) to signify that it is a merged column showing the table from which it is merged but if you don't 
	  want that, then you can simply uncheck the option which will keep the original name of the column.

Note - Data can be loaded directly from Power Query Editor window as well. Only difference is when you load it through Power BI, it asks if you want the 
	 loaded data to open in Power Query for transformation or you directly want to load the data but through Power Query it only says that the data is 
	 loaded. In both cases it shows sample data of top 200 rows.



Charts :
1. Column Chart - A Column Chart is a chart where data is presented vertically. (If you don't pass legend it will be a simple column chart)
		  It is a chart where the data is represented based on a particular factor
		  For Ex : If you pass Categories in the Axis and Sales in the Values
			   Then it shows the Sales Amount per Category - It shows how much Sales has happened for each Category
2. Stacked Column Chart - A Stacked Column chart is something where we show the data with divisions on some parameter based on a particular factor (Legend
		  is passed in order to make it a Stacked Column Chart)
		  For Ex : If you pass Categories in the Axis, Sales in the Values and Geography in the legend
			   Then it shows the Sales Amount per Category and shows the division of the Geography in the column itself
			   How much Sales has happened in different Regions for each Category
3. Pie Chart - It is a chart which is basically used to showcase part to whole relationship. It is usually good practice to show disctribution for 
	       a factor which has less than 6 - 7 items.
	       For Ex : If you pass Geography to the Legend and Sales in the Value, then it will show Sales Distribution across all geographies
4. Doughnut Chart - It is a chart which is also used to showcase part to whole relationship but here you get a hole in the middle and thus instead of 
		    slices you will be showing an arc representing the value. If you have less elements to show then Doughnut charts can be used but 
		    if you have relatively more elements then it is better to go for a Pie chart
5. Funnel Chart - It is a chart which is used to show the filtered data in different stages
		  For Ex : The Hiring process. Here you can show how many of the Candidates applied for the exam, how many appeared, how many cleared,
			   how many candidates hired. So the data will be represented as if it is flowing though a funnel filtered through different stages
6. Ribbon Chart - It is a chart which is used to display highest rank category over a period of time. The highest rank category always stays at the top
		  and the other Categories takes the position depending on the rank in each time period.
		  NOTE : For Ribbon Charts, it is mandatory to pass the legend based on which the ribbon is created. If it is not passed then it becomes
			 a simple column chart
7. Map - It is used to show a geographical location and for that the Data Category of the field has to be appropriate. It has to be either Address, City, 
	 State or Province, Country, Postal code, Latitude, Longitude etc.
8. Filled Map - It is also used to show a geographical location filled with colours to separate the other locations.
9. Map with Pie Chart - It is just a plain Map where the bubbles turns into a Pie if the Category dropped in the legend has values spread across all
			Geographies. It is a default behaviour which exists in the Map itself. This type of information cannot be shown using Filled Maps.
			NOTE : The distribution in the Pie will be equal in every geo since the measure is not given in the visual yet. Once you drop a 
			       measure say - "Sales" into Size, then you will see the slices appropriately. It creates the Pie based on the Sale Value
			       in different regions.
10. Table - Table is a visual where you can show data in a tabular format. This visual doesnot have anything other than Values and so whatever you drag and
	    drop into Values will be shown in the table. Sorting can be done from the elipses button of the Visual itself.
11. Matrix - Matrix is a visual which is used to show data in 2 dimentional format. For ex - Lets say we have many sub-categories and the sales for all of
	     those sub-categories are given for 4 diferent regions. If you try to present this kind of data in Table, then each sub-category will repeat 4
	     times because of the 4 regions for each sub-category and hense Matrix comes into picture which will help to represent the data in a much
	     better way. In Matrix we have 3 Fields - Row, Column & Values.
12. Line Chart - Line chart is a simple chart which is used to show the trend or progress over time. Whatever you throw in the Axis will come in the X-Axis
		 and whatever you throw in the Value will come in Y-Axis and the line is shown to present the trend
13. Area Chart - Area Chart is very similar to Line Chart. It highlights the area under the line to give insights saying how much area is covered by a
		 particular legend value.
14. Line VS Column Chart - There are two types of this type of combo Chart : (This type of chart has SharedAxis, ColumnValues, LineValues and ColumnSeries)
			   This type of chart takes two measures and can be analysed by two different dimentions. Here we get a secondary axis for the line
			   1> Line VS Clustered Cloumn - Once you drop a legend in the ColumnSeries, you will see that the each column has been splitted
							 into multiple Sub-Columns and you can analyse for a particular year
			   2> Line VS Stacked Column - Here we compare between the years
15. Scatter Plot - It is the only default visual which has an animation property in it. There are other charts as well which has animations but they are
		   not included by default. It is used to see the distribution. 2 measures are mandatorily required in order to use this chart. Now, you
		   just have to drop a dimention in the details field in order to see the distribution of that dimention. There is a field called Size 
		   which can be used to see the volume as it increases or decreases the size based on the distribution. Finally it also has a Play Axis
		   where basically you want to drop a date field so that it can show the change in distribution with time. There is a legend field as well
		   to categorize the data that you want to see in the distribution. Once you have dropped a date, you can select one of the items and see
		   the trend as well. A line is drawn for the selected items, to show the trend

Formating - We can do formatting in each and every visual by going inside the Format menu (looks like a paint brush)

Include & Exclude - It is used to filter the values visually from the screen and compare the sales between two different categories. This gets added into
		    the Filters pane so it is basically like adding visual level filter from the Filters pane.

View Data & Export - It is a functionality of Power BI where we can filter a visual and the details of the filtered part can be seen record by record. We 
		     don't have to filter it manually as we do it in excel. And that filtered data is then can be export very easily by clicking at end 
		     (...) button. Once you click the button you will get option to export the detials in a CSV. This permission to allow the end user to
		     export the filtered data can be selected from the Report setting under CURRENT FILE

Conditional Formatting - Conditional Formatting is a Feature present in the Table & Matrix Chart using which we can do Formatting based on a certain
			 condition. The Backgroud or Foreground Colour will change based on the Values, we can add icons and also Bars based on values.
			 We can also set custom rules as per our requirement and format the table accordingly.

Aggregations - Whenever we drop a numeric column in the field of a table, by default it shows the summation values (it is aggregated by default with sum)
	       We can change the aggregation by just right clicking on the numeric field from the field list and choose the desired aggregation. We can 
	       also show the values in percentage

Hirearchies - These are levels that are dependent on each other in someway and can be drilled down to see the details for each and every level. In Power BI
	      whenever you drop a date field it takes the date as a Hirearchy by default (you can change it back to original date format as well) and for
	      other fields you just have to drag and drop the field over the field for which you want to create the Hirearchy. These are easily created in
	      Matrix. If you drop more than one field in the Row or Column, it takes it as Hirearchy and so there can be levels created in both Row & Column
	      end in the Matrix and then if you want to drill down and go into the next level you have to select which way you want to drill first because
	      expansion of the levels is only possible in one way so it has to be either in the Row side or the Column side

Totals & Sub-Totals - In Matrix, it is very easy to turn on & off the Totals and Sub-Totals part because those are present as an option under the Format
		      section itself. We can change the colour size and other things from the same option.